{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\adeflang1025
{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Nimbus Roman No9 L;}{\f1\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Nimbus Roman No9 L;}{\f2\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f3\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Luxi Sans;}{\f4\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f5\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 HG Mincho Light J;}{\f6\fnil\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial Unicode MS;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red128\green128\blue128;}
{\stylesheet{\s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20\snext1 Standard;}
{\s2\sb240\sa120\keepn\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs28\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af5\afs28\langfe255\loch\f3\fs28\sbasedon1\snext3 Overskrift;}
{\s3\sa120\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20\sbasedon1\snext3 Br\'f8dtekst;}
{\s4\keepn\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\ai\loch\f2\fs20\i\sbasedon1\snext1{\*\soutlvl0} Overskrift 1;}
{\s5\sb240\sa60\keepn\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs24\langfe255\ai\ab\loch\f4\fs24\i\b\sbasedon1\snext1{\*\soutlvl1} Overskrift 2;}
{\*\cs7\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af5\afs24\langfe255\loch\f0\fs24\lang1043 WW-Standaardalinea-lettertype;}
{\*\cs8\cf2\ul\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af5\afs24\langfe255\loch\f0\fs24\lang1043\sbasedon7 Hyperlink;}
}
{\info{\title What to do in order to keep Low Saxon alive}{\author Hannah van Loon}{\creatim\yr2003\mo4\dy24\hr20\min15}{\operator Wil van Woerkom}{\revtim\yr2003\mo4\dy24\hr20\min54}{\printim\yr1601\mo1\dy1\hr0\min0}{\comment StarWriter}{\vern6410}}\deftab708
{\*\pgdsctbl
{\pgdsc0\pgdscuse195\pgwsxn11905\pghsxn16837\marglsxn1417\margrsxn1417\margtsxn1417\margbsxn1417\pgdscnxt0 Standard;}}
\paperh16837\paperw11905\margl1417\margr1417\margt1417\margb1417\sectd\sbknone\pgwsxn11905\pghsxn16837\marglsxn1417\margrsxn1417\margtsxn1417\margbsxn1417\ftnbj\ftnstart1\ftnrstcont\ftnnar\aenddoc\aftnrstcont\aftnstart1\aftnnrlc
\pard\plain \sb240\sa60\keepn\cf0\f4\lang1033\i\b\f2\i\b \s5\sb240\sa60\keepn\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs24\langfe255\ai\ab\loch\f4\fs24\i\b\ltrch\loch\lang1033 {\ltrch\loch\f4 What to do in order to keep Low Saxon alive}
\par \pard\plain \s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20\ltrch\loch\lang1033 {\ltrch\loch\f2 By Kenneth Rohde Christiansen}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 Low Saxon is dying out and quickly \endash  we have to admit that, and look at our alternatives. There has been some effort at standardizing the dialects of Low Saxon in The Netherlands, and creating a writing system (a different one per region, though). Because 
of this, we have a lot of Low Saxon material today; poetry, novels, history books, children\rquote s literature etc. This is great and might help Low Saxon to stay alive.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 The problem, though, is that young people don\rquote t learn the dialects and they don\rquote t carry on the dialect to future generations. This is due to many factors, and we have to look at what we can do in order to change that.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 This document represents some of my theories (which might very well be wrong) and ideas.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 Judging from myself, growing up speaking Jutish (a language/dialect spoken in Denmark), being teased and corrected, I should have pretty good ideas at what young people need. }
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 Recognition is the keyword, and the question is how to get this. A standard writing system helps a lot, as has also been shown in other regions. This is already present in the Netherlands for various Low Saxon dialects, but as long as there isn\rquote t a more br
oad standard writing language, some young people will just see this as an attempt to write in local dialect. Other young people need to accept Low Saxon as a language before it gets their recognition. A standardized writing system is crucial for language r
ecognition.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 I think it is very important to develop one or two (maximum) standard writing systems for Low Saxon in the Netherlands (Maybe \lquote Algemeen Noord-Oost Nedersaksisch\rquote  and \lquote Algemeen Zuid-Oost Nedersaksisch\rquote ). However, this is very hard to do, and won\rquote t be someth
ing you can do from one day to another. And there is another problem: many of those who have started to write Low Saxon want to write as close to their home dialect as possible, this is pretty understandable.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 What can we do then? Well, we could look at the unique language situation in Norway. In Norway, generally, it is very accepted to speak dialect. Actually, people dislike when people try to put their dialect behind them. Part of the reason for this, can be 
found in the writing system. The writing system consists of main forms, and alternative forms.}
\par 
\par \pard\plain \keepn\cf0\f2\fs20\i\f2\fs20\i \s4\keepn\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\ai\loch\f2\fs20\i {\ltrch\loch\f2 Ex. [alternative forms]}
\par \pard\plain \s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20\ltrch\loch\lang1033 {\ltrch\loch\f2 the bed: sengen, [senga]}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 This is very handy because of the following reasons. First of all, the main forms together form a language of themselves, a common Norwegian, which makes it possible for everyone to write books that addresses everyone in Norway (that could for instance be 
a math book, or a book on Norwegian history). However, it is also possible to write a novel or poetry in your own dialect (or something that resembles it very closely) by using the alternative forms.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 The only downside of this, as I have heard from Norwegians, is that allowing too many alternative forms can be bad. It makes it hard correcting essays etc, for instance. Thus, in Norway the minor alternative forms are not added to their official dictionary
.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 Right now, the dictionary of Grunnegers (Gronings) follows the Norwegian example, and consists of alternative spellings as well, but there are no forms that are marked as main forms. This means that if I wanted to translate a book to Grunnegers, then I\rquote d f
irst have to decide which dialect I am going to write; maybe, however, I\rquote d want to address all people speaking a Grunneger dialect. If some forms would be marked as main forms (and forming some kind of \lquote Aalgemeain Grunnegers\rquote ), then I could translate using
 these forms and address everyone. Maybe not in their home dialect, but in something which might resemble it pretty well.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 I see this as the first step toward more recognition. This for instance means that more general material can be produced. This might mean, though, that Grunnegers will develop more in the way of the defined \ldblquote common\rdblquote  (Algemeen) language; but rather that tha
n dying out\'85}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 This is just a first step, but a very welcome step for Grunnegers, Dr\'e8ents, Twents etc. The next step is to see if it is possible to make these Low Saxon languages a bit more \lquote general\rquote  in writing. I know that Grunnegers and Dr\'e8ents are quite different, so 
it might not be possible to unite these dialects into one general writing language, but it might be possible with others.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 If we could end up with two common languages of Low Saxon in The Netherlands that would be great, and it might very well mean a better chance at survival of Low Saxon. If these two languages then could be standardized where possible, e.g. use the same voca
l combinations for the same sounds, use either \lquote t or t in both languages etc., then that might mean that the language will, in time, develop to be more alike instead of just disappearing.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 If a certain kind of writing standardization has been established, it is time to look at the practical side. In my eyes, an important matter is spell check dictionaries for the computer. Young people use computers, so let\rquote s help them out, and let\rquote s try to 
make it available for free.}
\par 
\par \pard\plain \s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20{\ltrch\loch\f2{\lang1033 What is needed for a spell check dictionary is basically a simple list of words. There are dictionaries for Grunnegers and Dr\'e8ents, so with these lists of Grunneger and Dr\'e8ents words it would be possible to create such spell check dictionaries. This is a l
imited part of the original dictionaries (since the mapping to Dutch words isn\rquote t needed), so it would be nice if this could be free for everyone; or at least released on a license like the GPL (}{\*\cs8\cf2\ul\rtlch\ltrch\dbch\loch\f0\fs24\lang1043{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "http://www.gnu.org/" }{\fldrslt \*\cs8\cf2\ul\rtlch\ltrch\dbch\loch\f0\fs24\lang1043 www.gnu.org}}}{\lang1033  for information). If it is licensed under the GPL 
it means that the list of words is free for everyone (open source), but it is forbidden to use info from the words list in anything you earn money from. This means that it would be impossible to publish the word list in a book, unless I sell the book for p
urely the production price.}}
\par \pard\plain \s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20\ltrch\loch\lang1033 
\par \pard\plain \s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20{\ltrch\loch\f2{\lang1033 This is a common license used in Open Source software; and if word lists are released under this license, it will be possible for me to create spell check dictionaries for Linux and the free office suite OpenOffice ( and I am very willing to do this. It is
 probably also possible to create a spell check dictionary for Word, but I have no idea how to do this, and it might require using expensive software. Still it would be very nice if we could ship free redistributable spell check dictionaries for Word, Open
Office and Linux; and it might make a few more young people interested in writing in Grunnegers or one of the other Low Saxon dialects.}}
\par \pard\plain \s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20\ltrch\loch\lang1033 
\par \pard\plain \s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20{\ltrch\loch\f2{\lang1033 The Internet has become very popular by young people and language enthusiasts. Advantage should be taken. Dr\'e8etse taol already has a nice web page (www.drentsetaol.nl), and it might be possible to create something in the same spirit for Low Saxon in Nether
lands, and make it a meeting point for Low Saxon speakers, including younger ones. Maybe the web page of the federation SONT (}{\*\cs8\cf2\ul\rtlch\ltrch\dbch\loch\f0\fs24\lang1043{\field{\*\fldinst HYPERLINK "http://www.sont.nl/" }{\fldrslt \*\cs8\cf2\ul\rtlch\ltrch\dbch\loch\f0\fs24\lang1043\lang1033 www.sont.nl}}}{\lang1033 ) could fill this need. Another possibility would be to use the extensive network of language enthusiast (including Low
 Saxon) of Lowlands-L (www.lowlands-l.net).}}
\par \pard\plain \s1\cf0{\*\hyphen2\hyphlead2\hyphtrail2\hyphmax0}\rtlch\afs24\lang255\ltrch\dbch\af2\afs20\langfe255\loch\f2\fs20\ltrch\loch\lang1033 {\ltrch\loch\f2 Here it would be possible to announce events, distribute spell checkers, give small spellings tutorials and tell what is going on in the world of Low Saxon; and maybe even have a meeting board where people can post messages. If it could be done in cooperat
ion with the German Low Saxon speakers it would be even better and maybe help us cooperate further.}
\par 
\par {\ltrch\loch\f2 Mathieu Van Woerkom has already created a nice page for the different languages/dialect in the Netherlands (www.streektaal.cjb.net), so he might be interested in helping running such a site. Such a site would be a good way of uniting Low Saxon speakers (es
pecially younger ones, but I hope older ones will join as well) in the Netherlands, Germany, or all over the world.  }
\par }